A Valediction: Forbidding Mourning

    As virtuous men pass mildly away, 
    And whisper to their souls to go, 
    Whilst some of their sad friends do say 
    The breath goes now, and some say, No: 

    So let us melt, and make no noise, 
    No tear-floods, nor sigh-tempests move; 
    ‘Twere profanation of our joys 
    To tell the laity our love

    Moving of th’ earth brings harms and fears, 
    Men reckon what it did, and meant; 
    But trepidation of the spheres, 
    Though greater far, is innocent. 

    Dull sublunary lovers’ love 
    (Whose soul is sense) cannot admit 
    Absence, because it doth remove 
    Those things which elemented it. 

    But we by a love so much refined, 
    That our selves know not what it is, 
    Inter-assured of the mind, 
    Care less, eyes, lips, and hands to miss. 

    Our two souls therefore, which are one,
    Though I must go, endure not yet
    A breach, but an expansion,
    Like gold to airy thinness beat.

    If they be two, they are two so 
    As stiff twin compasses are two; 
    Thy soul, the fixed foot, makes no show 
    To move, but doth, if the other do. 

    And though it in the center sit, 
    Yet when the other far doth roam, 
    It leans and hearkens after it, 
    And grows erect, as that comes home. 

    Such wilt thou be to me, who must, 
    Like th’ other foot, obliquely run; 
    Thy firmness makes my circle just, 
    And makes me end where I begun. 

The Flea
    Mark but this flea, and mark in this,
    How little that which thou deniest me is;
    It sucked me first, and now sucks thee,
    And in this flea our two bloods mingled be;
    Thou know’st that this cannot be said
    A sin, nor shame, nor loss of maidenhead,
    Yet this enjoys before it woo,
    And pampered swells with one blood made of two,
    And this, alas, is more than we would do.

    Oh stay, three lives in one flea spare,
    Where we almost, nay more than married are.
    This flea is you and I, and this
    Our mariage bed, and marriage temple is;
    Though parents grudge, and you, w’are met,
    And cloistered in these living walls of jet.
    Though use make you apt to kill me,
    Let not to that, self-murder added be,
    And sacrilege, three sins in killing three.

    Cruel and sudden, hast thou since
    Purpled thy nail, in blood of innocence?
    Wherein could this flea guilty be,
    Except in that drop which it sucked from thee?
    Yet thou triumph’st, and say’st that thou
    Find’st not thy self, nor me the weaker now;
    ’Tis true; then learn how false, fears be:
    Just so much honor, when thou yield’st to me,
    Will waste, as this flea’s death took life from thee.

The Ecstasy
    Where, like a pillow on a bed
    A pregnant bank swell’d up to rest
    The violet’s reclining head,
    Sat we two, one another’s best.

    Our hands were firmly cemented
    With a fast balm, which thence did spring;
    Our eye-beams twisted, and did thread
    Our eyes upon one double string;

    So to’intergraft our hands, as yet
    Was all the means to make us one,
    And pictures in our eyes to get
    Was all our propagation.

    As ‘twixt two equal armies fate
    Suspends uncertain victory,
    Our souls (which to advance their state
    Were gone out) hung ‘twixt her and me.

    And whilst our souls negotiate there,
    We like sepulchral statues lay;
    All day, the same our postures were,
    And we said nothing, all the day.

    If any, so by love refin’
    That he soul’s language understod,
    And by good love were grown all ind,
    Within convenient distance stood,
    He (though he knew not which soul spake,
    Because both meant, both spake the same)
    Might thence a new concoction take
    And part far purer than he came.
    This ecstasy doth unperplex,
    We said, and tell us what we love;
    We see by this it was not sex,
    We see we saw not what did move;
    But as all several souls contain
    Mixture of things, they know not what,
    Love these mix’d souls doth mix again
    And makes both one, each this and that.
    A single violet transplant,
    The strength, the colour, and the size,
    (All which before was poor and scant)
    Redoubles still, and multiplies.
    When love with one another so
    Interinanimates two souls,
    That abler soul, which thence doth flow,
    Defects of loneliness controls.
    We then, who are this new soul, know
    Of what we are compos’d and made,
    For th’ atomies of which we grow
    Are souls, whom no change can invade.
    But oh alas, so long, so far,
    Our bodies why do we forbear?
    They’are ours, though they’are not we; we are
    The intelligences, they the spheres.
    We owe them thanks, because they thus
    Did us, to us, at first convey,
    Yielded their senses’ force to us,
    Nor are dross to us, but allay.
    On man heaven’s influence works not so,
    But that it first imprints the air;
    So soul into the soul may flow,
    Though it to body first repair.
    As our blood labors to beget
    Spirits, as like souls as it can,
    Because such fingers need to knit
    That subtle knot which makes us man,
    So must pure lovers’ souls descend
    T’ affections, and to faculties,
    Which sense may reach and apprehend,
    Else a great prince in prison lies.
    To’our bodies turn we then, that so
    Weak men on love reveal’d may look;
    Love’s mysteries in souls do grow,
    But yet the body is his book.
    And if some lover, such as we,
    Have heard this dialogue of one,
    Let him still mark us, he shall see
    Small change, when we’are to bodies gone.

The Canonization 

    For God’s sake hold your tongue, and let me love,
    Or chide my palsy, or my gout,
    My five gray hairs, or ruined fortune flout,
    With wealth your state, your mind with arts improve,
    Take you a course, get you a place,
    Observe his honor, or his grace,
    Or the king’s real, or his stampèd face
    Contemplate; what you will, approve,
    So you will let me love.

    Alas, alas, who’s injured by my love?
    What merchant’s ships have my sighs drowned?
    Who says my tears have overflowed his ground?
    When did my colds a forward spring remove?
    When did the heats which my veins fill
    Add one more to the plaguy bill?
    Soldiers find wars, and lawyers find out still
    Litigious men, which quarrels move,
    Though she and I do love.

    Call us what you will, we are made such by love;
    Call her one, me another fly,
    We’re tapers too, and at our own cost die,
    And we in us find the eagle and the dove.
    The phœnix riddle hath more wit
    By us; we two being one, are it.
    So, to one neutral thing both sexes fit.
    We die and rise the same, and prove
    Mysterious by this love.

    We can die by it, if not live by love,
    And if unfit for tombs and hearse
    Our legend be, it will be fit for verse;
    And if no piece of chronicle we prove,
    We’ll build in sonnets pretty rooms;
    As well a well-wrought urn becomes
    The greatest ashes, as half-acre tombs,
    And by these hymns, all shall approve
    Us canonized for Love.

    And thus invoke us: “You, whom reverend love
    Made one another’s hermitage;
    You, to whom love was peace, that now is rage;
    Who did the whole world’s soul contract, and drove
    Into the glasses of your eyes
    (So made such mirrors, and such spies,
    That they did all to you epitomize)
    Countries, towns, courts: beg from above
    A pattern of your love!”

The Funeral 

    Whoever comes to shroud me, do not harm,    
    Nor question much,     
    That subtle wreath of hair, which crowns my arm;    
    The mystery, the sign, you must not touch;    
    For ’tis my outward soul,     
    Viceroy to that, which then to heaven being gone,    
    Will leave this to control     
    And keep these limbs, her provinces, from dissolution.

    For if the sinewy thread my brain lets fall
    Through every part    
    Can tie those parts, and make me one of all,    
    Those hairs which upward grew, and strength and art    
    Have from a better brain,    
    Can better do ‘t; except she meant that I
    By this should know my pain,    
    As prisoners then are manacled, when they’re condemn’d to die.
        
    Whate’er she meant by it, bury it with me,
    For since I am    
    Love’s martyr, it might breed idolatry,    
    If into other hands these relics came.    
    As ’twas humility    
    To afford to it all that a soul can do,    
    So ’tis some bravery,
    That since you would have none of me, I bury some of you